Main idea: can costs for information about prices explain sticky prices? 

 

Model: (Market power through information cost) 

A continuum of consumers [0,1]; continuum of firms [0,1], with given distribution of marginal cost. 

Consumers can pay fixed cost c to buy a price draw from the given prices in the market (to be set by the firms). Depending on the price he draws and his expectation about the distribution of prices, the consumer will decide if it is beneficial to draw another price at additional cost c again. This will go on until the drawn price is low enough, such that it is not worth drawing further prices, given expected price draw and cost of draws. 

The firms will internalize this behavior and set prices accordingly to attract customers. But because there is randomness even the high marginal cost firms with higher prices will end up with customers, just less. There will also be some trade-off between attracting more customers with a lower price and making more profits off the ones that buy from you with that higher price. This will probably be somewhat complicated to solve, but will lead to some price/market share equilibrium, which we can then use to introduce demand increases/decreases due to monetary policy. The classics would predict that all firms will change their prices in accordance with the monetary policy and there will be no displacement of customers. I propose that customers are somewhat myopic to monetary policy and are triggered to search for new prices if their current price is changing too much (I.e. more than their inflation expectation). I.e. it might be better to stretch the price increase over more periods. I expect that there will be a strategic delaying until other firms have increased their prices, so that when the firm’s own customers draw new prices it is less likely that they will actually switching the firm. 

To make this coherent we will have to allow for expectation updating of such a triggered customer, once he employs price draws again, further complicating the mathematical solution. But overall, I think we can use this framework to exposit another channel that may contribute to price rigidities. 

A further complication might be, that if MC is constant, then firms might not have an incentive to increase their prices, even if faced with higher demand. We will probably have to follow the literature to assume increasing MC to activate this channel. 

In a nutshell: there will be a natural order of prices and market share of firms according to the marginal costs they face. This equilibrium will be upset by the change of marginal costs due to changes in demand induced by monetary policy/business cycles. The transition between this old and the new equilibrium resulting from the higher demand will probably exhibit a certain delay in price adaptation as firms spread the increase in prices over time. I.e. it will probably be profitable to forgo some profits in the short run to maintain your customer base, and thus ensure more profits in the long run. 

I have not yet encountered a similar framework in the literature, so I am very hopeful that this can provide a new insight into the existence of price rigidities. 

 

What this model would contribute (as far as I am aware): 

Offer a new insight into how price rigidities might be explained. 

Could help quantify the cost of inflation if inflation increases the amount of draws from the price distribution for consumers. 

Help explain why inflation expectations might be important for actual inflation. 

Offer a new framework for the market power literature due to search frictions. (There is some theoretical and empirical literature on search cost (information cost) in product markets and how this creates market power. I am still at the beginning of sifting through these papers, but hopeful that they can give me hints at how to specify my model to match the standard in the literature.) 

 

I think the model also offers great potential for derivative work (e.g. how strongly does the price stickiness changes if we change the market structure from perfectly similar products to monopolistic competition style product differentiation).  

 

 

 

 

 

A quote from Prof. Hamilton today that I think the model will fit perfectly: “Monetary policy affects price level but not relative prices.” Do you know a good reference that shows the truth of this statement? 

 
